---
layout: single
title:  "Schindler's List"
date:   2019-01-05 09:50:00 -0500
category: life
---
With the new year, one of my goals is to blog more (I'm shooting for at least once a week). Some of that will be tech related but I don't have the stamina to learn that much new technology in a year. I do have the ability to watch movies and try to talk about my thoughts on them! Primarily I'll be going off [this](https://github.com/paulsteele/goals/blob/master/movies.md) list for which movies to watch. They're a bunch of classics that I haven't seen so I'm hoping to play a bit of catch up. These posts may contain spoilers so be warned! The first one on the list is: Schindler's List 

I'll be honest. I didn't know a lot about this movie going into it. I vaguely knew it was about World War II, and I was fairly ignorant of the story of Schindler in general. I was a little surprised to see that its runtime just broke 3 hours. Suffice to say, I wasn't prepared for what I was about to experience. 

### Who is Oskar Schindler?
As the movie starts and Oskar Schindler, played by Liam Neeson, goes about preparing for a party, one of the things he does sets off what will be a recurring feeling I'll have throughout the movie. He puts on a Nazi party lapel pin. This immediately makes me question his allegiances. Does he actually support the Nazi party or is he simply trying to blend in? As he schmoozes his way through the party I'm leaning towards the latter but am not convinced. As he enters Kraków, his interactions with Itzhak Stern also leave me confused. Is he trying to help the Jews or simply make a buck off of them? His arguments about giving investors raw goods instead of stock, seem heartless at first glance but ultimately feel very practical given the current situation. Better to have goods with trade value than money that outsiders won't care for. When Stern talks to Schindler about whether to hire Poles or Jews, I start to think that Schindler is genuinely trying to help when he insists that he'll hire only jews. He cites lower cost reasons, but it was said in such a way that made me believe he had ulterior motives. The movie shows Stern helping guide Jews who had been restricted to the Ghetto to bluff their way into being deemed "essential for the war effort" allowing them to leave during the day and work at Schindler's factory. Things start to be pulling together. Schindler is helping these people using the money making as a front. Something makes me change my mind.

Stern brings a one armed employee by Schindler's office as the man wants to thank Schindler for saving his life by allowing him to work. Schindler grimaces his way through the meeting and then explodes on Stern telling him to never do that again, and chastises him for hiring such a employee saying it's dangerous for the business. Maybe Schindler really does just care for money. It seems Stern thinks as much of him. All of his interactions with his newfound boss seem forced. He never wants to drink with him and only states the facts, never expressing his opinions.

### Brutality
Schindler aside, this is where the movie starts showing parts of the true darkness of the Holocaust. Soon after the scene with Schindler and Stern, the factory workers are stopped on the road and ordered to shovel snow. The one armed man is taken aside and simply shot while the German officers laugh and joke around with each other. The film is in black and white but even then, the hue and viscosity of the blood is gut wrenching. Soon after we are introduced to Amon Göth, an SS officer who leads the construction of a local concentration camp. Göth is the epitome of brutality in this movie. While the camp is being constructed, a worker bypasses a supervisor and tells Göth that the foundation of the building wasn't constructed right, and will surely collapse. This woman graduated with an engineering degree and knows what she is talking about. Göth promptly has her shot in front of everyone and then orders the workers to do as she said. He kills her for no other reason than he can. 

The purging of Kraków Ghetto takes place after construction of the camp. This is one of the darker scenes of the movie and is a turning point. Shot after shot, we see hiding Jews being murdered with indiscretion. The horrors of this event become blindingly clear. Schindler oversees the carnage while riding his horse. In particular he focuses on one little girl, who has the only actually colored piece of clothing in the entire movie. A red coat. We see her duck and weave throughout the ghetto looking for a place to hide. This little girl, not even 10 years of age, can't escape death as shown later in the movie. This may be where Schindler realizes the true atrocities of the war. The gloves are off, it's obvious Germany truly wishes to destroy these people.

Göth doesn't stop there. Once he has the remaining Jews in his camp, he doesn't slow down. From his balcony of his estate, he casually fires his rifle onto the workers. Killing anyone who doesn't satisfy him. He's a monster.

### Schindler vs Göth
These two men I believe showcase the true difference in humanity during this war. While Schindler was focused on profits before, after the massacre he appears to be a new man, focused almost entirely on doing whatever he can to help those he callously used before. He uses his influencing powers to convince Göth to let him take his workers back to his factory as a type of "sub camp" where they were able to work in safety. Schindler uses his previous beloved wealth to entice guards, and Göth himself to follow his goals. Schindler saw the horror of the purging and recoiled. Göth saw the horror of the purging and wanted more. Schindler almost convinces Göth that true power comes from leaders "pardoning" those who make mistakes. And for a few instances Göth agrees, not immediately killing those around him who fail. It doesn't last long however and he murders a boy who couldn't get a stain out of his bathtub. Göth doesn't have any empathy for these people. He uses his power for his own entertainment, not caring who he hurts.

### Schindler and Stern
As Schindler helps more and more people, his relationship with Stern strengthens into what becomes a deep bond. Stern finally shares that drink with Schindler. When news arrives that all the workers will be moved to Auschwitz. Schindler and Stern end up creating the list. Schindler's List. A list of the all the Jews that Schindler wants to take to a different camp that he will build and oversee in Czechoslovakia. This camp will just be a front however. It won't help the Nazi party nor will it harm its workers. During this scene we and Stern see how just much Schindler has changed. He puts his all into creating that list. Knowing that each name will incur additional bribes. He fits as many possible people as he can afford.

There are more horrifying scenes that take place where the fear and horror of Auschwitz is shown. Ultimately in one of the last scenes. Schindler and the factory of people he was able to move, listen to the end of the war being announced on the radio. Schindler, in one last act of kindness, convinces the German guards to not execute their last order of murdering the remaining Jews. Schindler then prepares to leave as he has to escape from the Russians as he is seen as an influential part of the Nazi war machine. Schindler has a final monologue, which might be one of the most emotional scenes I've ever seen in a movie, where he laments why he didn't sell more of his own possessions to save "just one more" person.

### Importance of History
I see why this movie is considered the classic that it is. The emotion that is felt throughout the 3 hour experience can only be described as raw and unyielding. I firmly believe that reflecting on history and our mistakes is an important part of understanding and guiding our future. Schindler's List shows not only the true darkness of our past but also of the good that does exist in people. How one man, can truly make a difference in a world filled with hate.

